.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.TH PSTEXT2EPS 1 2003-02-11
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.SH NAME
pstex2eps \- Generate EPS file from PLplot pstex driver generated file
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pstex2eps
.RI <filename>
.SH DESCRIPTION
.\" TeX users may be more comfortable with the \fB<whatever>\fP and
.\" \fI<whatever>\fP escape sequences to invode bold face and italics,
.\" respectively.
\fBpstex2eps\fP is a program that generates an Encapsulated Postscript file
(eps) from the PLplot pstex driver generated files.
.PP
<filename> is the name of the output file you specified with the -o option
in PLplot.  There must exist two files, the postscript file without text,
<filename>, and the latex file with the text, <filename>_t.
.PP
The output file will be named <filename>.eps.
.PP
The Computer Modern Type 1 fonts will be included in the output eps file. If
you intent to use the plot figure in LaTeX, just use a plain
\\include{<filename>_t} in your latex file.
.SH SEE ALSO
The PLplot package at http://plplot.sf.net
.SH AUTHOR
This manual page was written by Rafael Laboissiere <rafael@debian.org>.
