.. _publications-main:

""""""""""""
Publications
""""""""""""

.. _publications-outreach:

==================
Outreach/Tutorials
==================

- Eldred, M.S., `Uncertainty Quantification Tutorial for Computer Scientists <http://exascaleresearch.labworks.org/ascrOct2011/uploads/dataforms/PRES_SNL_UQtutorial_111013.pdf>`_ , ASCR Exascale Research PI Meeting, Annapolis, MD, Oct. 13, 2011.
- Giunta, A.A., Eldred, M.S., Field, R.V., and Swiler, L.P., `Sensitivity Analysis and Uncertainty Quantification Short Course <http://sensitivity-analysis.com/>`_, AFRL Wright Labs, Dayton, OH, May 12-14, 2009.
- Giunta, A.A. and Eldred, M.S., Sensitivity Analysis and Uncertainty Quantification Short Course, NASA Langley Research Center, Hampton, VA, March 17-19, 2009.
- Iaccarino, G., Eldred, M.S., Ghattas, O., and Doostan, A., `"Minitutorial: Introduction to Uncertainty Quantification Techniques, parts I and II," <http://www.siam.org/meetings/cse09/mini.php>`_ SIAM CSE09 Conference, Miami, FL, March 2-6, 2009.   
- Swiler, L.P., T. Paez, T., and Mayes, R., `"Epistemic Uncertainty Quantification Tutorial <https://dakota.sandia.gov//sites/default/files/documents/294_swi.pdf>`_, SAND 2008-6578C, paper 294 in the Proceedings of the IMAC XXVII Conference and Exposition on Structural Dynamics, Society for Structural Mechanics, Orlando, FL, Feb. 2009.

.. _publications-books:

=============
Book Chapters
=============

- Eldred, M.S., Bichon, B.J., Adams, B.M., and Mahadevan, S., "Overview of Reliability Analysis and Design Capabilities in DAKOTA with Application to Shape Optimization of MEMS," Structural Design Optimization Considering Uncertainties, Tsompanakis, Lagaros, and Papadrakakis, eds., Structures and Infrastructures series, Vol. 1, Taylor & Francis Group, 2008, pp. 401-432.
- Biegler, L.T., Ghattas, O., Heinkenschloss, M., and van Bloemen Waanders, B., "Large-scale PDE-constrained Optimization: An Introduction," Large-Scale PDE-Constrained Optimization, Lecture Notes in Computational Science and Engineering, No. 30, Springer-Verlag, 2003, pp. 3-13.
- Salinger, A.G., Pawlowski, R.P., Shadid, J.N., van Bloemen Waanders, B., Bartlett, R., Itle, G.C., and Biegler, L., "rSQP Optimization of Large Scale Reacting Flow Applications with MPSalsa," Large-Scale PDE-Constrained Optimization, Lecture Notes in Computational Science and Engineering, No. 30, Springer-Verlag, 2003, pp. 45-59.
- Bartlett, R.A. and Biegler, L.T., `"rSQP++: An Object-Oriented Framework for Successive Quadratic Programming," <https://dakota.sandia.gov//sites/default/files/documents/SantaFePDE_rSQP.pdf>`_ Large-Scale PDE-Constrained Optimization, Lecture Notes in Computational Science and Engineering, No. 30, Springer-Verlag, 2003, pp. 316-330.

.. _publications-papers:

==============
Journal Papers
==============

- Jakeman, J.D. and Narayan, A., "Adaptive Leja sparse grid constructions for stochastic collocation and high-dimensional approximation," SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, submitted.
- Safta, C., Chowdhary, K., Sargsyan, K., Najm, H.N., Debusschere, B.J., Swiler, L.P., and Eldred, M.S., "Probabilistic Methods for Sensitivity Analysis and Calibration in the NASA Challenge Problem," in AIAA Journal, submitted.
- Jakeman, J.D. and Wildey, T.M., "Enhancing adaptive sparse grid approximations and improving refinement strategies using adjoint-based a posteriori error estimates," Journal of Compuational Physics, submitted.
- Bichon, B.J., Eldred, M.S., Mahadevan, S., and McFarland, J.M., `"Efficient Global Surrogate Modeling for Reliability-Based Design Optimization," <http://dx.doi.org/10.1115/1.4022999>`_ ASME Journal of Mechanical Design, Vol. 107, No. 1, Jan. 2013, pp. 011009:1-13.
- Weirs, V.G., Kamm, J.R., Swiler, L.P., Tarantola, S., Ratto, M., Adams, B.M., Rider, W.J., and Eldred, M.S., `"Sensitivity analysis techniques applied to a system of hyperbolic conservation laws," <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ress.2011.12.008>`_ Reliability Engineering and System Safety (RESS), Vol. 107, Nov. 2012, pp. 157-170.

  - Earlier version: Weirs, V.G., Swiler, L.P., Rider, W.J., Adams, B.M., Kamm, J.R., and Eldred, M.S., `"Sensitivity analysis using stochastic expansion methods to calculate variance-based sensitivity indices," <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2010.05.218>`_ Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, Vol. 2, No. 6, 2010, pp. 7765-7767.

- Constantine, P.G., Eldred, M.S., and Phipps, E.T., `"Sparse Pseudospectral Approximation Method," <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2012.03.019>`_ Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, Volumes 229-232, pp. 1-12, July 2012.
- Eldred, M.S., Swiler, L.P., and Tang, G., `"Mixed Aleatory-Epistemic Uncertainty Quantification with Stochastic Expansions and Optimization-Based Interval Estimation," <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ress.2010.11.010>`_ Reliability Engineering and System Safety (RESS), Vol. 96, No. 9, Sept. 2011, pp. 1092-1113.
- Eldred, M.S., `"Design Under Uncertainty Employing Stochastic Expansion Methods," <http://dx.doi.org/10.1615/IntJUncertaintyQuantification.v1.i2.20>`_ International Journal for Uncertainty Quantification, Vol. 1, No. 2, Feb. 2011, pp. 119-146.

  - Earlier version: `paper AIAA-2008-6001 <https://dakota.sandia.gov//sites/default/files/documents/AIAA_MAO2008_OUU_StochExp.pdf>`_ in Proceedings of the 12th AIAA/ISSMO Multidisciplinary Analysis and Optimization Conference, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada, Sept. 10-12, 2008.

- Jakeman, J.D., Eldred, M.S., and Xiu, D., `"A Numerical Approach for Quantification of Epistemic Uncertainty," <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2010.03.003>`_ Journal of Computational Physics (JCP), Vol. 229, No. 12, June 2010, pp. 4648-4663.
- Maute, K., Weickum, G., and Eldred, M.S., `"A Reduced-Order Stochastic Finite Element Approach for Design Optimization under Uncertainty," <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.strusafe.2009.06.004>`_ Structural Safety, 31 (6), Nov. 2009, pp. 450-459.
- Weickum, G., Eldred, M.S., and Maute, K., `"A Multi-point Reduced-Order Modeling Approach of Transient Structural Dynamics with Application to Robust Design Optimization," <http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00158-008-0309-5>`_ Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization, Vol. 38, No. 6, July 2009, pp. 599-611.
- Robinson, T.D., Eldred, M.S., Willcox, K.E., and Haimes, R., "Surrogate-Based Optimization using Multifidelity Models with Variable Parameterization and Corrected Space Mapping," AIAA Journal, Vol. 46, No. 11, Nov. 2008, pp. 2814-2822.
- Bichon, B.J., Eldred, M.S., Swiler, L.P., Mahadevan, S., and McFarland, J.M., "Efficient Global Reliability Analysis for Nonlinear Implicit Performance Functions," AIAA Journal, Vol. 46, No. 10, October 2008, pp. 2459-2468.
- Sallaberry, C.J., Helton, J.C., and Hora, S.C., "Extension of Latin Hypercube Samples with Correlated Variables." Reliability Engineering and System Safety, Vol. 93, pp. 1047-1059, 2008.
- Eldred, M.S., Agarwal, H., Perez, V.M., Wojtkiewicz, S.F., Jr., and Renaud, J.E., `"Investigation of Reliability Method Formulations in DAKOTA/UQ," <https://dakota.sandia.gov//sites/default/files/documents/SIE-KM-005.pdf>`_ Structure & Infrastructure Engineering: Maintenance, Management, Life-Cycle Design & Performance, Vol. 3, No. 3, Sept. 2007, pp. 199-213.

  - Earlier version: `conference paper <https://dakota.sandia.gov//sites/default/files/documents/UQ_Reliability_paper_PMC04.pdf>`_ in Proceedings of the 9th ASCE Joint Specialty Conference on Probabilistic Mechanics and Structural Reliability, Albuquerque, NM, July 26-28, 2004.

- Giunta, A.A., McFarland, J. M., Swiler, L.P., and Eldred, M.S., "The promise and peril of uncertainty quantification using response surface approximations," Structure & Infrastructure Engineering: Maintenance, Management, Life-Cycle Design & Performance, special issue on Uncertainty Quantification and Design under Uncertainty of Aerospace Systems, Vol. 2, Nos. 3-4, Sept.-Dec. 2006, pp. 175-189.
- Lemke, R.W., Knudson, M.D., Bliss, D.E., Cochrane, K., Davis, J.-P., Giunta, A.A., Harjes, H.C., and Slutz, S.A., "Magnetically accelerated, ultrahigh velocity flyer plates for shock wave experiments," J. Applied Physics, Vol. 98, 2005.
- Salinger, A.G., Pawlowski, R.P., Shadid, J.N., and van Bloemen Waanders, B., `"Computational Analysis and Optimization of a Chemical Vapor Deposition Reactor with Large-Scale Computing," <https://dakota.sandia.gov//sites/default/files/documents/CVD_2004.pdf>`_ Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research, in press, 2004.
- Simpson, T. W., Booker, A. J., Ghosh, D., Giunta, A. A., Koch, P. N. and Yang, R.-J., "Approximation Methods in Multidisciplinary Analysis and Optimization: A Panel Discussion," Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization, Vol. 27, No. 5, 2004, pp. 302-313.
- Eldred, M.S., Giunta, A.A., and van Bloemen Waanders, B.G., "Multilevel Parallel Optimization Using Massively Parallel Structural Dynamics," Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization, Springer-Verlag, Vol. 27, Nos. 1-2, May 2004, pp. 97-109.

  - Earlier version: paper AIAA-2001-1625 in Proceedings of the 42nd AIAA/ASME/ASCE/AHS/ASC Structures, Structural Dynamics, and Materials Conference, Seattle, WA, April 16-19, 2001.

- Romero, V. J., Swiler L. P., and Giunta, A. A., "Construction of Response Surfaces Based on Progressive-Lattice-Sampling Experimental Designs," Structural Safety, Vol. 26, No. 2, pp. 201-219, 2004.
- Greenberg, D.S., Hart, W.E., and Phillips, C.A., `"Enabling Department-Scale Supercomputing," <https://dakota.sandia.gov//sites/default/files/documents/DeptScaleSC.pdf>`_ Algorithms for Parallel Processing, IMA Volumes in Mathematics and Its Applications, 105:321-344. 1999.
- Hart, W.E., `"Sequential Stopping Rules for Random Optimization Methods with Applications to Multistart Local Search," <http://www.cs.sandia.gov/~wehart/abstracts.html#Har99>`_ SIAM Journal of Optimization, 1999, pp. 270-290. Also appears as Sandia Technical Report SAND94-2666, Nov. 1994.
- Dowding, K.J., and Blackwell, B.F., `"Joint Experimental/Computational Techniques to Measure Thermal Properties of Solids," <https://dakota.sandia.gov//sites/default/files/documents/mstjoint.pdf>`_ Measurement Science and Technology, Vol. 9, No. 6, June 1998, pp. 877-887.
- Eldred, M.S., Outka, D.E., Bohnhoff, W.J., Witkowski, W.R., Romero, V.J., Ponslet, E.R., and Chen, K.S., `"Optimization of Complex Mechanics Simulations with Object-Oriented Software Design," <https://dakota.sandia.gov//sites/default/files/documents/CMSEpaper.pdf>`_ Computer Modeling and Simulation in Engineering, Vol. 1, No. 3, August 1996, pp. 323-352.

  - Earlier version: paper AIAA-95-1433 in Proceedings of the 36th AIAA/ASME/ ASCE/AHE/ASC Structures, Structural Dynamics, and Materials Conference, New Orleans, LA, April 10-13, 1995, pp. 2406-2415.
  
.. _publications-conf-papers:
  
=================
Conference Papers
=================

- Padron, A.S, Alonso, J.J., Palacios, F., Barone, M., and Eldred, M.S., "Multi-Fidelity Uncertainty Quantification Application to a Vertical Axis Wind Turbine Under an Extreme Gust," to appear in AIAA Aviation and Aeronautics Forum and Exposition 2014 (15th AIAA/ISSMO Multidisciplinary Analysis and Optimization Conference), Atlanta, GA, June 16-20, 2014.
- Safta, C., Chowdhary, K., Sargsyan, K., Najm, H.N., Debusschere, B.J., Swiler, L.P., and Eldred, M.S., "Uncertainty Quantification Methods for Model Calibration, Validation, and Risk Analysis," paper AIAA-2014-1497 in 16th AIAA Non-Deterministic Approaches Conference, National Harbor, Maryland, January 13-17, 2014.
- Ng, L.W.T. and Eldred, M.S., "Multifidelity Uncertainty Quantification Using Nonintrusive Polynomial Chaos and Stochastic Collocation," paper AIAA-2012-1852 in Proceedings of the 53rd AIAA/ASME/ASCE/AHS/ASC Structures, Structural Dynamics and Materials Conference (14th AIAA Non-Deterministic Approaches Conference), Honolulu, Hawaii, April 23-26, 2012.
- Eldred, M.S., Barone, M.F., Domino, S.P., Alonso, J.J., Iaccarino, G., Duraisamy, K., Tang, G, Witteveen, J.A.S., "Large-Scale Uncertainty and Error Analysis for Time-dependent Fluid/Structure Interactions in Wind Turbine Applications: Summary of Advances in Algorithm Research and Deployment," ASCR Exascale Research Conference, Portland, Apr. 16-18, 2012.
- Najm, H.N., Debusschere, B.J., Eldred, M.S., Safta, C., Jakeman, J.D., Higdon, D.M., Gattiker, J.R., Ghanem, R.G., Knio, O.M., Alexanderian, A., Marzouk, Y.M., El Moselhy, T.A., Li, J., Conrad, P.R., Bui-Thanh, T., Ghattas, O., Martin, J., Moser, R., Prudencio, E., and Stadler, G., "Quantification of Uncertainty in Extreme Scale Computations (QUEST)," ASCR Exascale Research Conference, Portland, Apr. 16-18, 2012.
- Eldred, M.S. and Swiler, L.P., "Towards Goal-Oriented Stochastic Design Employing Adaptive Collocation Methods, paper AIAA-2010-9125 in Proceedings of the 13th AIAA/ISSMO Multidisciplinary Analysis and Optimization Conference, Fort Worth, TX, Sept. 13-15, 2010.
- Swiler, L.P. and West, N.J., "Importance Sampling: Promises and Limitations, paper AIAA-2010-2850 in Proceedings of the 51st AIAA/ASME/ASCE/AHS/ASC Structures, Structural Dynamics, and Materials Conference (12th AIAA Non-Deterministic Approaches Conference), Orlando, FL, Apr 12-15, 2010.
- Tang, G., Iaccarino, G., and Eldred, M.S., "Global Sensitivity Analysis for Stochastic Collocation Expansion, paper AIAA-2010-2922 in Proceedings of the 51st AIAA/ASME/ASCE/AHS/ASC Structures, Structural Dynamics, and Materials Conference (12th AIAA Non-Deterministic Approaches Conference), Orlando, FL, Apr 12-15, 2010.
- Tang, G., Swiler. L.P., and Eldred, M.S., "Using Stochastic Expansion Methods in Evidence Theory for Mixed Aleatory-Epistemic Uncertainty Quantification," paper AIAA-2010-2589 in Proceedings of the 51st AIAA/ASME/ASCE/AHS/ASC Structures, Structural Dynamics, and Materials Conference (12th AIAA Non-Deterministic Approaches Conference), Orlando, FL, Apr 12-15, 2010.
- West, N.J. and Swiler, L.P., "Parameter Estimation via Gaussian Processes and Maximum Likelihood Estimation, paper AIAA-2010-2851 in Proceedings of the 51st AIAA/ASME/ASCE/AHS/ASC Structures, Structural Dynamics, and Materials Conference (12th AIAA Non-Deterministic Approaches Conference), Orlando, FL, Apr 12-15, 2010.
- Bichon, B.J., Mahadevan. S., and Eldred, M.S., "Reliability-Based Design Optimization Using Efficient Global Reliability Analysis, paper AIAA-2009-2261 in Proceedings of the 50th AIAA/ASME/ASCE/AHS/ASC Structures, Structural Dynamics, and Materials Conference (11th AIAA Non-Deterministic Approaches Conference), Palm Springs, CA, May 4-7, 2009.
- Eldred, M.S., "Recent Advances in Non-Intrusive Polynomial Chaos and Stochastic Collocation Methods for Uncertainty Analysis and Design, paper AIAA-2009-2274 in Proceedings of the 50th AIAA/ASME/ASCE/AHS/ASC Structures, Structural Dynamics, and Materials Conference (11th AIAA Non-Deterministic Approaches Conference), Palm Springs, CA, May 4-7, 2009.
- Swiler, L.P., Paez, T.L., Mayes, R.L., and Eldred, M.S., "Epistemic Uncertainty in the Calculation of Margins, paper AIAA-2009-2249 in Proceedings of the 50th AIAA/ASME/ASCE/AHS/ASC Structures, Structural Dynamics, and Materials Conference (11th AIAA Non-Deterministic Approaches Conference), Palm Springs, CA, May 4-7, 2009.
- Eldred, M.S. and Burkardt, J., "Comparison of Non-Intrusive Polynomial Chaos and Stochastic Collocation Methods for Uncertainty Quantification, paper AIAA-2009-0976 in Proceedings of the 47th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting, Orlando, FL, Jan. 5-8, 2009.
- Swiler, L.P., Adams, B.M., and Eldred, M.S., "Model Calibration Under Uncertainty: Matching Distribution Information, paper AIAA-2008-5944 in Proceedings of the 12th AIAA/ISSMO Multidisciplinary Analysis and Optimization Conference, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada, Sept. 10-12, 2008.
- Eldred, M.S., Webster, C.G., and Constantine, P.G., "Evaluation of Non-Intrusive Approaches for Wiener-Askey Generalized Polynomial Chaos, paper AIAA-2008-1892 in Proceedings of the 49th AIAA/ASME/ASCE/AHS/ASC Structures, Structural Dynamics, and Materials Conference (10th AIAA Non-Deterministic Approaches Conference), Schaumburg, IL, April 7-10, 2008.
- Swiler, L.P. and Giunta, A.A., "Aleatory and epistemic uncertainty quantification for engineering applications, Proceedings of the Joint Statistical Meetings, July 29 - Aug. 2, 2007, Denver, CO.
- Bichon, B.J., Eldred, M.S., Swiler, L.P., Mahadevan, S., and McFarland, J.M., "Multimodal Reliability Assessment for Complex Engineering Applications using Efficient Global Optimization, paper AIAA-2007-1946 in Proceedings of the 48th AIAA/ASME/ASCE/AHS/ASC Structures, Structural Dynamics, and Materials Conference (9th AIAA Non-Deterministic Approaches Conference), Honolulu, HI, April 23-26, 2007.
- Eldred, M.S., Adams, B.M., Copps, K.D., Carnes, B., Notz, P.K., Hopkins, M.M., and Wittwer, J.W., "Solution-Verified Reliability Analysis and Design of Compliant Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems, paper AIAA-2007-1934 in Proceedings of the 48th AIAA/ASME/ASCE/AHS/ASC Structures, Structural Dynamics, and Materials Conference (9th AIAA Non-Deterministic Approaches Conference), Honolulu, HI, April 23-26, 2007.
- Adams, B.M., Eldred, M.S., Wittwer, J., and Massad, J., "Reliability-Based Design Optimization for Shape Design of Compliant Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems, paper AIAA-2006-7000 in the Proceedings of the 11th AIAA/ISSMO Multidisciplinary Analysis and Optimization Conference, Portsmouth, VA, Sept. 6-8, 2006.
- Eldred, M.S. and Dunlavy, D.M., "Formulations for Surrogate-Based Optimization with Data Fit, Multifidelity, and Reduced-Order Models, paper AIAA-2006-7117 in the Proceedings of the 11th AIAA/ISSMO Multidisciplinary Analysis and Optimization Conference, Portsmouth, VA, Sept. 6-8, 2006.
- Giunta, A.A., Swiler, L.P., Brown, S.L., Eldred, M.S., Richards, M.D., and Cyr, E.C., "The Surfpack Software Library for Surrogate Modeling of Sparse Irregularly Spaced Multidimensional Data, paper AIAA-2006-7049 in the Proceedings of the 11th AIAA/ISSMO Multidisciplinary Analysis and Optimization Conference, Portsmouth, VA, Sept. 6-8, 2006.
- Robinson, T.D., Willcox, K.E., Eldred, M.S., and Haimes, R., "Multifidelity Optimization for Variable-Complexity Design, paper AIAA-2006-7114 in the Proceedings of the 11th AIAA/ISSMO Multidisciplinary Analysis and Optimization Conference, Portsmouth, VA, Sept. 6-8, 2006.
- Eldred, M.S. and Bichon, B.J., "Second-Order Reliability Formulations in DAKOTA/UQ, paper AIAA-2006-1828 in Proceedings of the 47th AIAA/ASME/ASCE/AHS/ASC Structures, Structural Dynamics, and Materials Conference (8th AIAA Non-Deterministic Approaches Conference), Newport, Rhode Island, May 1 - 4, 2006.
- Robinson, T.D., Eldred, M.S., Willcox, K.E., and Haimes, R., "Strategies for Multifidelity Optimization with Variable Dimensional Hierarchical Models, paper AIAA-2006-1819 in Proceedings of the 47th AIAA/ASME/ASCE/AHS/ASC Structures, Structural Dynamics, and Materials Conference (2nd AIAA Multidisciplinary Design Optimization Specialist Conference), Newport, Rhode Island, May 1 - 4, 2006.
- Weickum, G., Eldred, M.S., and Maute, K., "Multi-point Extended Reduced Order Modeling For Design Optimization and Uncertainty Analysis, paper AIAA-2006-2145 in Proceedings of the 47th AIAA/ASME/ASCE/AHS/ASC Structures, Structural Dynamics, and Materials Conference (2nd AIAA Multidisciplinary Design Optimization Specialist Conference), Newport, Rhode Island, May 1 - 4, 2006.
- Eldred, M.S., Bichon, B.J., and Adams, B.M., "Overview of Reliability Analysis and Design Capabilities in DAKOTA,Proceedings of the NSF Workshop on Reliable Engineering Computing (REC 2006), Savannah, GA, February 22-24, 2006.
- Eldred, M.S., Giunta, A.A., and Collis, S.S, "Second-Order Corrections for Surrogate-Based Optimization with Model Hierarchies, paper AIAA-2004-4457 in Proceedings of the 10th AIAA/ISSMO Multidisciplinary Analysis and Optimization Conference, Albany, NY, Aug. 30 - Sept. 1, 2004.
- Giunta, A.A., Eldred, M.S., Swiler, L.P., Trucano, T.G., and Wojtkiewicz, S.F., Jr., "Perspectives on Optimization Under Uncertainty: Algorithms and Applications paper AIAA-2004-4451 in Proceedings of the 10th AIAA/ISSMO Multidisciplinary Analysis and Optimization Conference, Albany, NY, Aug. 30 - Sept. 1, 2004.
- Perez, V.M., Eldred, M.S., and Renaud, J.E., "Solving the Infeasible Trust-region Problem Using Approximations, paper AIAA-2004-4312 in Proceedings of the 10th AIAA/ISSMO Multidisciplinary Analysis and Optimization Conference, Albany, NY, Aug. 30 - Sept. 1, 2004.
- Giunta, A.A., Eldred, M.S., and Castro, J.P., "Uncertainty Quantification Using Response Surface Approximations,Proceedings of the 9th ASCE Joint Specialty Conference on Probabilistic Mechanics and Structural Reliability, Albuquerque, NM, July 26-28, 2004.
- Perez, V.M., Eldred, M.S., and Renaud, J.E., "An rSQP Approach for a Single-Level Reliability Optimization,Proceedings of the 9th ASCE Joint Specialty Conference on Probabilistic Mechanics and Structural Reliability, Albuquerque, NM, July 26-28, 2004.
- van Bloemen Waanders, B., "Application of Optimization Methods to the Calibration of Water Distribution Systems," Proceedings of the World Water and Environmental Resources Congress (EWRI), Salt Lake City, UT, June 27 - July 1, 2004.
- Giunta, A.A., Wojtkiewicz, S.F., Jr., and Eldred, M.S., "Overview of Modern Design of Experiments Methods for Computational Simulations, paper AIAA-2003-0649 in Proceedings of the 41st AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV, Jan. 6-9, 2003.
- Simpson, T.W., Booker, A.J., Ghosh, D., Giunta, A.A., Koch, P.N., and Yang, R.-J., "Approximation Methods in Multidisciplinary Analysis and Optimization: A Panel Discussion,3rd ISSMO/AIAA Internet Conference on Approximations in Optimization, Oct. 14-18, 2002.
- Eldred, M.S., Giunta, A.A., Wojtkiewicz, S.F., Jr., and Trucano, T.G., "Formulations for Surrogate-Based Optimization Under Uncertainty, paper AIAA-2002-5585 in Proceedings of the 9th AIAA/ISSMO Symposium on Multidisciplinary Analysis and Optimization, Atlanta, GA, Sept. 4-6, 2002.
- Giunta, A.A., Eldred, M.S., Trucano, T.G., and Wojtkiewicz, S.F., Jr., "Optimization Under Uncertainty Methods for Computational Shock Physics Applications, paper AIAA-2002-1642 in Proceedings of the 43rd AIAA/ASME/ASCE/AHS/ASC Structures, Structural Dynamics, and Materials Conference (Nondeterministic Approaches Forum), Denver, CO, April 22-25, 2002.
- Giunta, A. A., "Use of Data Sampling, Surrogate Models, and Numerical Optimization in Engineering Design, paper AIAA-2002-0538 in Proceedings of the 40th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, NV, Jan. 2002.
- Wojtkiewicz, S.F., Jr., Eldred, M.S., Field, R.V., Jr., Urbina, A., and Red-Horse, J.R., "A Toolkit For Uncertainty Quantification In Large Computational Engineering Models, paper AIAA-2001-1455 in Proceedings of the 42nd AIAA/ASME/ASCE/AHS/ASC Structures, Structural Dynamics, and Materials Conference, Seattle, WA, April 16-19, 2001.
- Eldred, M.S., Hart, W.E., Schimel, B.D., and van Bloemen Waanders, B.G., "Multilevel Parallelism for Optimization on MP Computers: Theory and Experiment, paper AIAA-2000-4818 in Proceedings of the 8th AIAA/USAF/NASA/ISSMO Symposium on Multidisciplinary Analysis and Optimization, Long Beach, CA, September 6-8, 2000.
- Giunta, A.A., and Eldred, M.S., "Implementation of a Trust Region Model Management Strategy in the DAKOTA Optimization Toolkit, paper AIAA-2000-4935 in Proceedings of the 8th AIAA/USAF/NASA/ISSMO Symposium on Multidisciplinary Analysis and Optimization, Long Beach, CA, September 6-8, 2000.
- Eldred, M.S., and Schimel, B.D., "Extended Parallelism Models for Optimization on Massively Parallel Computers, paper 16-POM-2 in Proceedings of the 3rd World Congress of Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization (WCSMO-3), Amherst, NY, May 17-21, 1999.
- Eldred, M.S., and Hart, W.E., "Design and Implementation of Multilevel Parallel Optimization on the Intel TeraFLOPS, paper AIAA-98-4707 in Proceedings of the 7th AIAA/USAF/NASA/ISSMO Symposium on Multidisciplinary Analysis and Optimization, St. Louis, MO, Sept. 2-4, 1998, pp. 44-54.
- Blackwell, B.F., and Eldred, M.S., "Application of Reusable Interface Technology for Thermal Parameter Estimation,Proceedings of the 32nd National Heat Transfer Conference, Vol. 2, Eds. Dulikravitch, G.S., and Woodbury, K.E., HTD-Vol. 340, August 1997, pp. 1-8.
- Chen, K.S., and Witkowski, W.R., "Design Optimization of Liquid-Distribution Chamber-Slot Dies Using the DAKOTA Toolkit," 50th Annual Conference of the Society for Imaging Science and Technology, Cambridge MA, May 18-23, 1997.
- Hobbs, M. L., "A Global HMX Decomposition Model," 1996 JANNAF Propulsion Systems Hazards Subcommittee Meeting, Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, CA, Nov. 4-8, 1996.
- Eldred, M.S., Hart, W.E., Bohnhoff, W.J., Romero, V.J., Hutchinson, S.A., and Salinger, A.G., "Utilizing Object-Oriented Design to Build Advanced Optimization Strategies with Generic Implementation, paper AIAA-96-4164 in Proceedings of the 6th AIAA/USAF/NASA/ISSMO Symposium on Multidisciplinary Analysis and Optimization, Bellevue, WA, Sept. 4-6, 1996, pp. 1568-1582.
- Moen, C.D., Spence, P.A., Meza, J.C., and Plantenga, T.D., "Automatic Differentiation for Gradient-Based Optimization of Radiatively Heated Microelectronics Manufacturing Equipment," paper AIAA-96-4118 in Proceedings of the 6th AIAA/USAF/NASA/ISSMO Symposium on Multidisciplinary Analysis and Optimization, Bellevue, WA, Sept. 4-6, 1996, pp. 1167-1175.
- Ponslet, E.R., and Eldred, M.S., "Discrete Optimization of Isolator Locations for Vibration Isolation Systems: an Analytical and Experimental Investigation," paper AIAA-96-4178 in Proceedings of the 6th AIAA/USAF/NASA/ISSMO Symposium on Multidisciplinary Analysis and Optimization, Bellevue, WA, Sept. 4-6, 1996, pp. 1703-1716. Also appears as <a href="https://dakota.sandia.gov//sites/default/files/documents/VibIsol_SAND961169.pdf>Sandia Technical Report SAND96-1169, May 1996.
- Hart, W.E., "A Stationary Point Convergence Theory for Evolutionary Algorithms,"Proceedings of Foundations of Genetic Algorithms 4, San Diego, CA, August 3-5, 1996, pp. 325-342.
- Hart, W.E., Baden, S., Belew, R.K., Kohn, S., "Analysis of the Numerical Effects of Parallelism on a Parallel Genetic Algorithm,"Proceedings of the 10th International Parallel Processing Symposium(IPPS '96), Honolulu, HI, April 15-19, 1996, pp. 606-612.
- Hart, W.E., "A Theoretical Comparison of Evolutionary Algorithms and Simulated Annealing,"Proceedings of the Fifth Annual Conference on Evolutionary Programming (EP '96), San Diego, CA, February 29 - March 2, 1996, pp. 147-154.
- Harding, D.C., Eldred, M.S., and Witkowski, W.R., "Integration of Finite Element Analysis and Numerical Optimization Techniques for RAM Transport Package Design," Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on the Packaging and Transportation of Radioactive Materials (PATRAM '95), Las Vegas, NV, Dec. 3-8, 1995.
- Harding, D.C., and Eldred, M.S., "Radioactive Material Transportation Package Design Using Numerical Optimization Techniques," Proceedings of the 1995 Joint ASME/JSME Pressure Vessels and Piping Conference, Honolulu, Hawaii, July 23-27, 1995, Vol. PVP-307, pp. 29-36.
- Romero, V.J., Eldred, M.S., Bohnhoff, W.J., and Outka, D.E., "Application of Optimization to the Inverse Problem of Finding the Worst-Case Heating Configuration in a Fire," Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Numerical Methods in Thermal Problems, Atlanta, GA, July 17-21, 1995, Vol. 9, Part 2, pp. 1022-1033.
- Witkowski, W.R., Eldred, M.S., and Harding, D.C., "Integration of Numerical Analysis Tools for Automated Numerical Optimization of a Transportation Package Design," Proceedings of the 5th AIAA/NASA/USAF/ISSMO Symposium on Multidisciplinary Analysis and Optimization, paper AIAA94-4259, Panama City Beach, FL, Sept. 7-9, 1994.

.. _publications-conf-posters:

==================
Conference Posters
==================

- Alonso, J.J., Barone, M.F., Domino, S.P., Duraisamy, K., Eldred, M.S., Iaccarino, G., Jakeman, J.D., Tang, G., and Xiu, D., "Large-Scale Uncertainty and Error Analysis for Wind Turbine Applications: Compressive Sensing with Sub-sampling and Gradient Enhancement," 2013 ASCR Applied Math PI Meeting, Albuquerque, NM, Aug 6-8, 2013.
- Eldred, M.S., Safta, C., Sargsyan, K., Debusschere, B.J., Jakeman, J.D., Chowdhary, K., and Najm, H.N., "Sandia Software Enabling Extreme-Scale Uncertainty Quantification," 2013 SciDAC PI Meeting, Rockville, MD, July 24-26, 2013.
- Chowdhary, K., Jakeman, J.D., Eldred, M.S., Safta, C., and Najm, H.N., "Algorithms for missing and sparse data," 2013 SciDAC PI Meeting, Rockville, MD, July 24-26, 2013.
- Jackson, C., Price, S., Eldred, M.S., Heimbach, P., Jakeman, J.D., Kalashnikova, I., Perego, M., Salinger, A., and Stadler, G., "PISCEES - Quantification of Uncertainty in Sea-Level Rise from Next Generation Ice Sheet Models," 2013 SciDAC PI Meeting, Rockville, MD, July 24-26, 2013.
- Debusschere, B.J., Eldred, M.S., Jakeman, J.D., Sargsyan, K., Safta, C., Ray, J., Chowdhary, K., and Najm, H.N., "Algorithm Developments fur UQ in Extreme Scale Simulations," 2012 SciDAC PI Meeting, Rockville, MD, Sept. 10-12, 2012.
- Eldred, M.S., Higdon, D., Prudencio, E., and Debusschere, B.J., "QUEST Software Tools for Uncertainty Propagation and Inference," 2012 SciDAC PI Meeting, Rockville, MD, Sept. 10-12, 2012.
- Najm, H.N., Debusschere, B.J., Eldred, M.S., Safta, C., Jakeman, J.D., Higdon, D.M., Gattiker, J.R., Ghanem, R.G., Knio, O.M., Alexanderian, A., Marzouk, Y.M., El Moselhy, T.A., Li, J., Conrad, P.R., Bui-Thanh, T., Ghattas, O., Martin, J., Moser, R., Prudencio, E., and Stadler, G., "Quantification of Uncertainty in Extreme Scale Computations (QUEST)," ASCR Exascale Research Conference, Portland, Apr. 16-18, 2012.
- Alonso, J.J., Iaccarino, G., Duraisamy, K., Witteveen, J.A.S., Petrone, G., Tang, G., Eldred, M.S., Barone, M.F., Domino, S.P., Xiu, D., "Large-Scale Uncertainty and Error Analysis for Time-dependent Fluid/Structure Interactions in Wind Turbine Applications," 2011 ASCR Applied Mathematics Program PI Meeting, Washington DC, Oct. 17-19, 2011.

.. _publications-conf-abstracts:

====================
Conference Abstracts
====================

- Jakeman, J.D. and Eldred, M.S., "Adaptive Basis Selection Methods for Enhancing Compressed Sensing," SIAM Conference on Uncertainty Quantification (UQ14), Savannah, GA, March 31-April 3, 2014.
- Jakeman, J.D. and Narayan, A., "Adaptive Sparse Grid Inteprolation Using One-Dimensional Leja Sequences," SIAM Conference on Uncertainty Quantification (UQ14), Savannah, GA, March 31-April 3, 2014.
- Jakeman, J.D. and Eldred, M.S., "Constructing Polynomial Chaos Expansions via Compressed Sensing and Cross Validation," 12th U.S. National Congress on Computational Mechanics, Raleigh, NC, July 22-25, 2013.
- Eldred, M.S., Jakeman, J.D., Wildey, T.M., and Ng, L.W.T., "Multiple Model Forms in Uncertainty Quantification," 2013 SIAM Conference on Computational Science & Engineering, Boston, MA, Feb. 25-March 1, 2013.
- Eldred, M.S., "Formulations for Optimization Under Uncertainty: Tailoring for UQ Propagation Methods," 13th INFORMS Computing Society Conference, Santa Fe, NM, January 6-8, 2013.
- Najm, H.N., Sargsyan, K., Safta, C., Debusschere, B.J., Jakeman, J.D., and Eldred, M.S., "Sparse Polynomial Representations of High Dimensional Models," 10th World Congress on Computational Mechanics, 8-13 July, 2012, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
- Adams, B.M., Swiler, L.P., and Eldred, M.S., "Practical UQ for Engineering Applications with DAKOTA," SIAM Conference on Uncertainty Quantification, Raleigh, NC, April 2-5, 2012.
- Eldred, M.S., Phipps, E.T., and Dalbey, K.R., "Adjoint enhancement within global stochastic methods," SIAM Conference on Uncertainty Quantification, Raleigh, NC, April 2-5, 2012.
- Phipps, E.T. and Eldred, M.S., "Scalable collocation methods using a combination of Krylov basis recycling and adjoint enhancement," SIAM Conference on Parallel Processing for Scientific Computing, Savannah, GA, Feb. 15-17, 2012.
- Eldred, M.S., "Dimension Adaptive Refinement Approaches in Stochastic Expansion Methods," 11th U.S. National Congress on Computational Mechanics (USNCCM), Minneapolis, MN, July 25-29, 2011.
- Eldred, M.S., "Adaptive p-refinement Approaches in Stochastic Expansion Methods," 2011 SIAM Conference on Computational Science and Engineering (CSE11), Reno, NV, February 28 - March 4, 2011.
- Phipps, E.T., Eldred, M.S., Ghanem, R., Pawlowski, R.P., Red-Horse, J.R., Schmidt, R.C., and Stripling, H., "Stochastic Dimension Reduction for Network Coupled Systems," 2010 SIAM Annual Meeting (AN10), Pittsburgh, PA, July 12--16, 2010.
- Eldred, M.S. and Xiu, D., "Mixed Aleatory/Epistemic Uncertainty Analysis and Design Under Uncertainty with Nonintrusive Polynomial Chaos and Stochastic Collocation Methods," 10th U.S. National Congress on Computational Mechanics (USNCCM), Columbus, OH, July 16-19, 2009.
- Eldred, M.S., "Experiences with nonintrusive polynomial chaos and stochastic collocation methods for uncertainty analysis and design," SIAM Conference on Computational Science and Engineering (CSE09), Miami, FL, March 2-6, 2009.
- Maute, K., Weickum, G., and Eldred, M.S., "Stochastic Reduced-Order Modeling Techniques for Design Under Uncertainty," Proceedings of the 8th World Congress on Computational Mechanics (WCCM8), Venice, Italy, June 30 - July 5, 2008.
- Adams, B.M., "The DAKOTA Toolkit for Parallel Optimization and Uncertainty Analysis," SIAM Conference on Optimization (OP08), Boston, MA, May 10--13, 2008.
- Adams, B.M., "Uncertainty-Aware Design Optimization with the DAKOTA Toolkit," INFORMS Annual Meeting 2007, Seattle, WA, November 4--7, 2007.
- Adams, B.M., "Derivative-free Optimization Methods in DAKOTA with Applications," Second International Conference on Continuous Optimization (ICCOPT II) and Modeling and Optimization: Theory and Applications (MOPTA 07), Hamilton, ON, Canada, August 13--16, 2007.
- Carnes, B., Copps, K.D., Eldred, M.S., Adams, B.M., Wittwer, J.W., "Coupled a posteriori error estimation and uncertainty quantification for a nonlinear elasticity MEMS problem," abstract for SIAM Conference on Computational Science and Engineering (CSE07), Costa Mesa, CA, February 19-23, 2007.
- Dunlavy, D.M. and Eldred, M.S., "Formulations for Surrogate-Based Optimization Using Data Fit and Multifidelity Models," abstract for SIAM Conference on Computational Science and Engineering (CSE07), Costa Mesa, CA, February 19-23, 2007.
- Robinson, T.D., Willcox, K.E., Eldred, M.S., and Haimes, R., "Multifidelity Optimization for Variable-Complexity Design," Second International Workshop on Surrogate Modeling and Space Mapping for Engineering Optimization, Lyngby, Denmark, Nov. 9-11, 2006.
- Adams, B.M., "Uncertainty quantification for credible simulation and risk analysis: methods, software tools, and research needs," Workshop on Assessment of Sensitivity/Uncertainty Analysis Capabilities Applicable for the Nuclear Fuel Cycle, NC State University, Raleigh, NC, May 31, 2006.
- Adams, B.M., Eldred, M.S., and Swiler, L.P., "Uncertainty Quantification and Reliability Analysis-Based Design Optimization Capabilities in DAKOTA," Ninth Copper Mountain Conference on Iterative Methods, Copper Mountain, CO, April 7, 2006.
- Giunta, A.A., Castro, J.P., Hough, P.D.,Gray, G.A., Eldred, M.S., "Multifidelity Modeling Approaches in Simulation-Based Optimization," abstract for the SIAM Conference on Optimization, Stockholm, Sweden, May 15-19, 2005.
- Giunta, A.A., Eldred, M.S., Hough, P.D., and Castro, J.P., "Overview of Surrogate-Based Optimization Research and Applications at Sandia National Laboratories," abstract for the Surrogate Optimization Workshop, Houston, TX, May 24-25, 2004.
- Giunta, A.A. and Eldred, M.S., "Robust Design Optimization Using Surrogate Models," abstract for the Robust Optimization-Directed Design (RODD) Conference, Shalimar, FL, April 19-21, 2004.
- Giunta, A.A., Eldred, M.S., Wojtkiewicz, S.F., Jr., Trucano, T.G., and Castro, J.P., "Surrogate-Based Optimization Methods for Engineering Design," abstract in Proceedings of the Fifth Biennial Tri-Laboratory Engineering Conference on Computational Modeling, Santa Fe, NM, October 21-23, 2003.
- Giunta, A. A., and Eldred, M. S., "Surrogate-Based Optimization Under Uncertainty: Formulations and Applications" abstract in the Proceedings of the 18th International Symposium on Mathematical Programming, Copenhagen, Denmark, Aug. 2003.
- Eldred, M.S., Giunta, A.A., Wojtkiewicz, S.F., Jr., and Trucano, T.G., "Formulations for Surrogate-Based Optimization Under Uncertainty," abstract in Proceedings of the 7th U.S. National Congress on Computational Mechanics, Albuquerque, NM, July 28-30, 2003.
- Giunta, A.A. and Eldred, M.S., "Engineering Design Optimization Algorithms: Theory and Practice," abstract in Proceedings of the 7th U.S. National Congress on Computational Mechanics, Albuquerque, NM, July 28-30, 2003.
- Eldred, M.S., Giunta, A.A., Wojtkiewicz, S.F., Jr., and Trucano, T.G., "Surrogate-Based Optimization Under Uncertainty: Status and Directions," abstract in SIAM Conference on Computational Science and Engineering. Final Program and Abstracts, San Diego, CA, Feb 10-13, 2003.
- Giunta, A.A. and Eldred, M.S., "Case Studies in Computational Engineering Design Optimization: Challenges and Solutions," abstract in SIAM Conference on Computational Science and Engineering. Final Program and Abstracts, San Diego, CA, Feb 10-13, 2003.
- Eldred, M.S., "DAKOTA: Virtual Prototyping with Large-Scale Engineering Simulations," abstract in IMA Workshop 4: Optimization in Simulation-Based Models, Minneapolis, MN, January 9-16, 2003.
- Eldred, M.S., "The DAKOTA Optimization Framework: Virtual Prototyping with ASCI-Scale Simulations," abstract in Proceedings of the Fourth Biennial Tri-Laboratory Engineering Conference on Computational Modeling, Albuquerque, NM, Oct. 23-24, 2001, p. 82.
- Wojtkiewicz, S.F., Jr., Field, R.V., Jr., Eldred, M.S., Red-Horse, J.R., and Urbina, A., "Uncertainty Quantification in Large Computational Engineering Models," abstract in Proceedings of the Fourth Biennial Tri-Laboratory Engineering Conference on Computational Modeling, Albuquerque, NM, Oct. 23-24, 2001, p. 11.
- Hart, W. E., Giunta, A. A., Salinger, A. G., and van Bloemen Waanders, B., "An Overview of the Adaptive Pattern Search Algorithm and its Application to Engineering Optimization Problems," abstract in Proceedings of the McMaster Optimization Conference: Theory and Applications, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada, August 2001, p. 20.
- Wojtkiewicz, S.F., Jr., Eldred M.S., Field, R.V., Jr., Urbina, A., Red-Horse, J.R., and Giunta, A.A., "DAKOTA/UQ: A Toolkit for Uncertainty Quantification in a Multiphysics, Massively Parallel Computational Environment," presented as (1) poster at ODU-NASA Training Workshop on Nondeterministic Approaches and Their Potential for Future Aerospace Systems, held in Langley, Virginia, May 30-31, 2001, (2) abstract (no proceedings) at USNCCM VI (Sixth United States Congress on Computational Mechanics) held in Dearborn, Michigan, August 1-3, 2001, and (3) abstract (no proceedings) at LLNL Sensitivity Analysis Workshop, August 16-17, 2001.
- van Bloemen Waanders, B., "Simultaneous Analysis and Design Optimization of Massively Parallel Simulation Codes using Object Oriented Framework," abstract for Tenth SIAM Conference on Parallel Processing for Scientific Computing, March 2001.
- Giunta, A.A., "Coupling High-Performance Computing, Optimization, and Shock Physics Simulations," abstract in session CP04 of the Final Program of the First SIAM Conference on Computational Science and Engineering, Washington, DC, September 21-23, 2000, p. 47.
- Hart, W.E., Eldred, M.S., and Giunta, A.A., "Solving mixed-integer nonlinear problems with PICO," abstract in proceedings of the 17th International Symposium on Mathematical Programming (ISMP 2000), Atlanta, GA, August 7-11, 2000.
- van Bloemen Waanders, B.G., Eldred, M.S., Hart, W.E., Schimel, B.D., and Giunta, A.A., "A Review of the Dakota Toolkit, Multilevel Parallelism for Complex PDE Simulations on TeraFLOP Computers," abstract presented in the Optimization in Engineering Minisymposium at the SIAM Annual Meeting, Rio Grande, Puerto Rico, July 10-14, 2000.
- Romero, V.J., Painton, L.A., and Eldred, M.S., "Optimization Under Uncertainty: Shifting of Maximum Vulnerability Point Due to Uncertain Failure Thresholds," 1997 INFORMS Spring Meeting, San Diego, CA, May 1997.
- Eldred, M.S., Outka, D.E., and Bohnhoff, W.J., "Optimization of Complex Engineering Simulations with the DAKOTA Toolkit," abstract in Proceedings of the First Biennial Tri-Laboratory Engineering Conference on Computational Modeling, Pleasanton, CA, Oct. 31-Nov. 2, 1995.

.. _publications-sand-reports:

============
SAND Reports
============

- Dakota 6.18 (May 2023) Manuals

  - User's: B. M. Adams, W. J. Bohnhoff, K. R. Dalbey, M. S. Ebeida, J. P. Eddy, M. S. Eldred, R. W. Hooper, P. D. Hough, K. T. Hu, J. D. Jakeman, M. Khalil, K. A. Maupin, J. A. Monschke, E. E. Prudencio, E. M. Ridgway, A. A. Rushdi, D. T. Seidl, J. A. Stephens, L. P. Swiler, and J. G. Winokur. Dakota 6.18.0 documentation. Technical Report SAND2023-03367O, Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, NM, May 2023. Available online from http://snl-dakota.github.io.
  - Developer: B. M. Adams, W. J. Bohnhoff, R. A. Canfield, K. R. Dalbey, M. S. Ebeida, J. P. Eddy, M. S. Eldred, G. Geraci, R. W. Hooper, P. D. Hough, K. T. Hu, J. D. Jakeman, K. Carson, M. Khalil, K. A. Maupin, J. A. Monschke, E. E. Prudencio, E. M. Ridgway, A. A. Rushdi, D. T. Seidl, J. A. Stephens, L. P. Swiler, A. Tran, D. M. Vigil, G. J. von Winckel, T. M. Wildey, J. G. Winokur, and (with Menhorn, F. and Zeng, X.). Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.18 Developers Manual. Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, NM, May 2023. Available online from http://snl-dakota.github.io.


- Dakota 6.17 (November 2022) Manuals

  - Beginning with Dakota 6.17, the Theory, Users, and Reference manuals were combined, and PDFs were not issued.
  - User's: (Please cite Dakota software with this reference or other applicable manual/version) B. M. Adams, W. J. Bohnhoff, K. R. Dalbey, M. S. Ebeida, J. P. Eddy, M. S. Eldred, R. W. Hooper, P. D. Hough, K. T. Hu, J. D. Jakeman, M. Khalil, K. A. Maupin, J. A. Monschke, E. M. Ridgway, A. A. Rushdi, D. T. Seidl, J. A. Stephens, L. P. Swiler, and J. G. Winokur. Dakota 6.18.0 documentation. Technical Report SAND2022-15651O, Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, NM, November 2022. Available online from http://snl-dakota.github.io.
  - Developer: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Canfield, R.A., Coomber, W.P., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Geraci, G., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Kent, C., Khalil, M., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Seidl, D.T., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Tran, A., Vigil, D.M., Wildey, T.M., Winokur, J.G., Menhorn, F., and Zeng, X., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.17 Developers Manual," November 2022.


- Dakota 6.16 (May 2022) Manuals

  - For active use of the Reference and Developer's Manuals we strongly recommend using the HTML versions.
  - User's: (Please cite Dakota software with this reference or other applicable manual/version) Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Khalil, M., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Seidl, D.T., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., and Winokur, J.G., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.16 User’s Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2022-6171, May 2022.
  - Reference: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Canfield, R.A., Coomber, W.P., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Geraci, G., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Kent, C., Khalil, M., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Seidl, D.T., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Tran, A., Vigil, D.M., Wildey, T.M., Winokur, J.G., Menhorn, F., and Zeng, X., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.16.0 Reference Manual," May 2022.
  - Theory: Dalbey, K.R., Eldred, M.S., Geraci, G., Jakeman, J.D., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Seidl, D.T., Swiler, L.P., Tran, A., Menhorn, F., and Zeng, X., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.16 Theory Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2022-6172, May 2022.
  - Developer: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Canfield, R.A., Coomber, W.P., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Geraci, G., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Kent, C., Khalil, M., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Seidl, D.T., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Tran, A., Vigil, D.M., Wildey, T.M., Winokur, J.G., Menhorn, F., and Zeng, X., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.16 Developers Manual," May 2022.


- Dakota 6.15 (November 2021) Manuals

  - For active use of the Reference and Developer's Manuals we strongly recommend using the HTML versions.
  - User's: (Please cite Dakota software with this reference or other applicable manual/version) Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Khalil, M., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Seidl, D.T., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., and Winokur, J.G., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.15 User’s Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2021-5822, November 2021.
  - Reference: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Canfield, R.A., Coomber, W.P., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Geraci, G., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Kent, C., Khalil, M., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Seidl, D.T., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Tran, A., Vigil, D.M., Wildey, T.M., Winokur, J.G., Menhorn, F., and Zeng, X., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.15 Reference Manual," November 2021.
  - Theory: Dalbey, K.R., Eldred, M.S., Geraci, G., Jakeman, J.D., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Seidl, D.T., Swiler, L.P., Tran, A., Menhorn, F., and Zeng, X., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.15 Theory Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2021-5821, November 2021.
  - Developer: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Canfield, R.A., Coomber, W.P., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Geraci, G., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Kent, C., Khalil, M., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Seidl, D.T., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Tran, A., Vigil, D.M., Wildey, T.M., Winokur, J.G., Menhorn, F., and Zeng, X., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.15 Developers Manual," November 2021.

- Dakota 6.14 (May 2021) Manuals

  - For active use of the Reference and Developer's Manuals we strongly recommend using the HTML versions.
  - User's: (Please cite Dakota software with this reference or other applicable manual/version) Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Khalil, M., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Seidl, D.T., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., and Winokur, J.G., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.14 User’s Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2021-5822, May 2021.
  - Reference: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Canfield, R.A., Coomber, W.P., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Geraci, G., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Kent, C., Khalil, M., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Seidl, D.T., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Tran, A., Vigil, D.M., Wildey, T.M., Winokur, J.G., Menhorn, F., and Zeng, X., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.14 Reference Manual," May 2021.
  - Theory: Dalbey, K.R., Eldred, M.S., Geraci, G., Jakeman, J.D., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Seidl, D.T., Swiler, L.P., Tran, A., Menhorn, F., and Zeng, X., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.14 Theory Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2021-5821, May 2021.
  - Developer: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Canfield, R.A., Coomber, W.P., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Geraci, G., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Kent, C., Khalil, M., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Seidl, D.T., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Tran, A., Vigil, D.M., Wildey, T.M., Winokur, J.G., Menhorn, F., and Zeng, X., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.14 Developers Manual," May 2021.

- Dakota 6.13 (November 2020) Manuals

  - For active use of the Reference and Developer's Manuals we strongly recommend using the HTML versions.
  - User's: (Please cite Dakota software with this reference or other applicable manual/version) Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Khalil, M., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Seidl, D.T., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., and Winokur, J.G., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.13 User’s Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2020-12495, November 2020.
  - Reference: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Canfield, R.A., Coomber, W.P., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Geraci, G., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Kent, C., Khalil, M., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Seidl, D.T., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Tran, A., Vigil, D.M., Wildey, T.M., Winokur, J.G., Menhorn, F., and Zeng, X., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.13 Reference Manual," November 2020.
  - Theory: Dalbey, K.R., Eldred, M.S., Geraci, G., Jakeman, J.D., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Seidl, D.T., Swiler, L.P., Tran, A., Menhorn, F., and Zeng, X., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.12 Theory Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2020-12496, November 2020.
  - Developer: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Canfield, R.A., Coomber, W.P., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Geraci, G., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Kent, C., Khalil, M., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Seidl, D.T., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Tran, A., Vigil, D.M., Wildey, T.M., Winokur, J.G., Menhorn, F., and Zeng, X., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.13 Developers Manual," November 2020.

- Dakota 6.12 (May 2020) Manuals

  - For active use of the Reference and Developer's Manuals we strongly recommend using the HTML versions.
  - User's: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Khalil, M., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Seidl, D.T., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., and Winokur, J.G., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.12 User’s Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2020-5001, May 2020.
  - Reference: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Canfield, R.A., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Geraci, G., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Kent, C., Khalil, M., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Seidl, D.T., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Tran, A., Vigil, D.M., Wildey, T.M., Winokur, J.G., Menhorn, F., and Zeng, X., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.12 Reference Manual," May 2020.
  - Theory: Dalbey, K.R., Eldred, M.S., Geraci, G., Jakeman, J.D., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Seidl, D.T., Swiler, L.P., Tran, A., Menhorn, F., and Zeng, X., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.12 Theory Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2020-4987, May 2020.
  - Developer: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Canfield, R.A., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Geraci, G., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Kent, C., Khalil, M., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Seidl, D.T., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Tran, A., Vigil, D.M., Wildey, T.M., Winokur, J.G., Menhorn, F., and Zeng, X., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.12 Developers Manual," May 2020.

- Dakota 6.11 (November 2019) Manuals

  - For active use of the Reference and Developer's Manuals we strongly recommend using the HTML versions.
  - User's: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Geraci, G., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Khalil, M., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., Wildey, T.M., and Winokur, J.G., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.11 User’s Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-4633, July 2014; updated November 2019.
  - Reference: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Geraci, G., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Khalil, M., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., Wildey, T.M., and Winokur, J.G., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.11 Reference Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-5015, July 2014; updated November 2019.
  - Theory: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Geraci, G., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Khalil, M., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A.,  Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., Wildey, T.M., and Winokur, J.G., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.11 Theory Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-4253, July 2014; updated November 2019.
  - Developer: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Geraci, G., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Khalil, M., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., Wildey, T.M., and Winokur, J.G., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.11 Developers Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-5014, July 2014; updated November 2019.

- Dakota 6.10 (May 2019) Manuals

  - For active use of the Reference and Developer's Manuals we strongly recommend using the HTML versions.
  - User's: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Geraci, G., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Khalil, M., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., Wildey, T.M., and Winokur, J.G., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.10 User’s Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-4633, July 2014; updated May 2019.
  - Reference: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Geraci, G., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Khalil, M., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., Wildey, T.M., and Winokur, J.G., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.10 Reference Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-5015, July 2014; updated May 2019.
  - Theory: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Geraci, G., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Khalil, M., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A.,  Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., Wildey, T.M., and Winokur, J.G., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.10 Theory Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-4253, July 2014; updated May 2019.
  - Developer: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Geraci, G., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Khalil, M., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., Wildey, T.M., and Winokur, J.G., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.10 Developers Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-5014, July 2014; updated May 2019.

- Dakota 6.9 (November 2018) Manuals

  - For active use of the Reference and Developer's Manuals we strongly recommend using the HTML versions.
  - User's: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Frye, J.R., Geraci, G., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Khalil, M., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., Wildey, T.M., and Winokur, J.G., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.9 User’s Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-4633, July 2014; updated November 2018.
  - Reference: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Frye, J.R., Geraci, G., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Khalil, M., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., Wildey, T.M., and Winokur, J.G., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.9 Reference Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-5015, July 2014; updated November 2018.
  - Theory: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Frye, J.R., Geraci, G., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Khalil, M., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A.,  Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., Wildey, T.M., and Winokur, J.G., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.9 Theory Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-4253, July 2014; updated November 2018.
  - Developer: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Frye, J.R., Geraci, G., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Khalil, M., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., Wildey, T.M., and Winokur, J.G., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.9 Developers Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-5014, July 2014; updated November 2018.

- Dakota 6.8 (May 2018) Manuals

  - For active use of the Reference and Developer's Manuals we strongly recommend using the HTML versions.
  - User's: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Frye, J.R., Geraci, G., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Khalil, M., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., Wildey, T.M., and Winokur, J.G., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.8 User’s Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-4633, July 2014; updated May 2018.
  - Reference: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Frye, J.R., Geraci, G., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Khalil, M., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., Wildey, T.M., and Winokur, J.G., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.8 Reference Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-5015, July 2014; updated May 2018.
  - Theory: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Frye, J.R., Geraci, G., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Khalil, M., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A.,  Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., Wildey, T.M., and Winokur, J.G., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.8 Theory Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-4253, July 2014; updated May 2018.
  - Developer: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Frye, J.R., Geraci, G., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Khalil, M., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., Wildey, T.M., and Winokur, J.G., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.8 Developers Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-5014, July 2014; updated May 2018.

- Dakota 6.7 (November 2017) Manuals

  - For active use of the Reference and Developer's Manuals we strongly recommend using the HTML versions.
  - User's: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Frye, J.R., Geraci, G., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Khalil, M., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., and Wildey, T.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.7 User’s Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-4633, July 2014; updated November 2017.
  - Reference: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Frye, J.R., Geraci, G., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Khalil, M., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., and Wildey, T.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.7 Reference Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-5015, July 2014; updated November 2017.
  - Theory: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Frye, J.R., Geraci, G., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Khalil, M., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., and Wildey, T.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.7 Theory Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-4253, July 2014; updated November 2017.
  - Developer: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Frye, J.R., Geraci, G., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Khalil, M., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., and Wildey, T.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.7 Developers Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-5014, July 2014; updated November 2017.

- Dakota 6.6 (May 2017) Manuals

  - For active use of the Reference and Developer's Manuals we strongly recommend using the HTML versions.
  - User's: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Frye, J.R., Geraci, G., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Khalil, M., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., and Wildey, T.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.6 User’s Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-4633, July 2014; updated May 2017.
  - Reference: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Frye, J.R., Geraci, G., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Khalil, M., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., and Wildey, T.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.6 Reference Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-5015, July 2014; updated May 2017.
  - Theory: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Frye, J.R., Geraci, G., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Khalil, M., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., and Wildey, T.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.6 Theory Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-4253, July 2014; updated May 2017.
  - Developer: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Frye, J.R., Geraci, G., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Khalil, M., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., and Wildey, T.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.6 Developers Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-5014, July 2014; updated May 2017.

- Dakota 6.5 (November 2016) Manuals

  - For active use of the Reference and Developer's Manuals we strongly recommend using the HTML versions.
  - User's: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Geraci, G., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., and Wildey, T.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.5 User’s Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-4633, July 2014; updated November 2016.
  - Reference: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Geraci, G., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., and Wildey, T.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.5 Reference Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-5015, July 2014; updated November 2016.
  - Theory: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Geraci, G., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., and Wildey, T.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.5 Theory Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-4253, July 2014; updated November 2016.
  - Developer: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Geraci, G., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., and Wildey, T.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.5 Developers Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-5014, July 2014; updated November 2016.

- Adams, B.M., Coleman, Kayla, Hooper, Russell W., Khuwaileh, Bassam A., Lewis, Allison, Smith, Ralph C., Swiler, Laura P., Turinsky, Paul J., Williams, Brian J., "User Guidelines and Best Practices for CASL VUQ Analysis Using Dakota, Sandia Technical Report 2016-11614 (also CASL-U-2016-1233-000), September 2016.
- Dakota 6.4 (May 2016) Manuals

  - For active use of the Reference and Developer's Manuals we strongly recommend using the HTML versions.
  - User's: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., and Wildey, T.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.4 User’s Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-4633, July 2014; updated May 2016.
  - Reference: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., and Wildey, T.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.4 Reference Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-5015, July 2014; updated May 2016.
  - Theory: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., and Wildey, T.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.4 Theory Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-4253, July 2014; updated May 2016.
  - Developer: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Maupin, K.A., Monschke, J.A., Ridgway, E.M., Rushdi, A.A., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., and Wildey, T.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.4 Developers Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-5014, July 2014; updated May 2016.

- Dakota 6.3 (November 2015) Manuals

  - For active use of the Reference and Developer's Manuals we strongly recommend using the HTML versions.
  - User's: Adams, B.M., Bauman, L.E., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Rushdi, A.A., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., and Wildey, T.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.3 User’s Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-4633, July 2014; updated November 2015.
  - Reference: Adams, B.M., Bauman, L.E., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Rushdi, A.A., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., and Wildey, T.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.3 Reference Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-5015, July 2014; updated November 2015.
  - Theory: Adams, B.M., Bauman, L.E., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Rushdi, A.A., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., and Wildey, T.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.3 Theory Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-4253, July 2014; updated November 2015.
  - Developer: Adams, B.M., Bauman, L.E., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Hooper, R.W., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Rushdi, A.A., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., and Wildey, T.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.3 Developers Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-5014, July 2014; updated November 2015.

- Dakota 6.2 (May 2015) Manuals

  - For active use of the Reference and Developer's Manuals we strongly recommend using the HTML versions.
  - User's: Adams, B.M., Bauman, L.E., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., and Wildey, T.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.2 User’s Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-4633, July 2014; updated May 2015.
  - Reference: Adams, B.M., Bauman, L.E., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., and Wildey, T.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.2 Reference Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-5015, July 2014; updated May 2015.
  - Theory: Adams, B.M., Bauman, L.E., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., and Wildey, T.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.2 Theory Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-4253, July 2014; updated May 2015.
  - Developer: Adams, B.M., Bauman, L.E., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., and Wildey, T.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.2 Developers Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-5014, July 2014; updated May 2015.

- Dakota 6.1 (November 2014) Manuals

  - For active use of the Reference and Developer's Manuals we strongly recommend using the HTML versions.
  - User's: Adams, B.M., Bauman, L.E., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., and Wildey, T.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.1 User’s Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-4633, July 2014; updated November 2014.
  - Reference: Adams, B.M., Bauman, L.E., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., and Wildey, T.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.1 Reference Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-5015, July 2014; updated November 2014.
  - Theory: Adams, B.M., Bauman, L.E., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., and Wildey, T.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.1 Theory Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-4253, July 2014; updated November 2014.
  - Developer: Adams, B.M., Bauman, L.E., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., and Wildey, T.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.1 Developers Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-5014, July 2014; updated November 2014.

- Dakota 6.0 (May 2014) Manuals

  - For active use of the Reference and Developer's Manuals we strongly recommend using the HTML versions.
  - User's: Adams, B.M., Bauman, L.E., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., and Wildey, T.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.0 User’s Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-4633, July 2014.
  - Reference: Adams, B.M., Bauman, L.E., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., and Wildey, T.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.0 Reference Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-5015, July 2014.
  - Theory: Adams, B.M., Bauman, L.E., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., and Wildey, T.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.0 Theory Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-4253, July 2014.
  - Developer: Adams, B.M., Bauman, L.E., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., Vigil, D.M., and Wildey, T.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 6.0 Developers Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2014-5014, July 2014.

- (Superseded by 2016 version) Adams, B.M., Hooper, Russell W., Lewis, Allison, McMahan Jr., Jerry A., Smith, Ralph C., Swiler, Laura P., and Williams, Brian J., "User Guidelines and Best Practices for CASL VUQ Analysis Using Dakota, Sandia Technical Report 2014-2864 (also CASL-U-2014-0038-000), March 2014.
- Dakota 5.4 (November 2013) Manuals

  - User's: Adams, B.M., Bauman, L.E., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., and Vigil, D.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 5.4 User’s Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2010-2183, December 2009; updated November 2013.
  - Reference: Adams, B.M., Bauman, L.E., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., and Vigil, D.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 5.4 Reference Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2010-2184, December 2009; updated November 2013.
  - Theory: Adams, B.M., Bauman, L.E., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., and Vigil, D.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 5.4 Theory Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2011-9106, December 2009; updated November 2013.
  - Developer: Adams, B.M., Bauman, L.E., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Stephens, J.A., Swiler, L.P., and Vigil, D.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 5.4 Developers Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2010-2185, December 2009; updated November 2013.

- Dakota 5.3.1 (May 2013) Manuals

  - User's: Adams, B.M., Bauman, L.E., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Swiler, L.P., and Vigil, D.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 5.3.1 User’s Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2010-2183, December 2009; updated May 2013.
  - Reference: Adams, B.M., Bauman, L.E., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Swiler, L.P., and Vigil, D.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 5.3.1 Reference Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2010-2184, December 2009; updated May 2013.
  - Theory: Adams, B.M., Bauman, L.E., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Swiler, L.P., and Vigil, D.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 5.3.1 Theory Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2011-9106, December 2009; updated May 2013.
  - Developer: Adams, B.M., Bauman, L.E., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Swiler, L.P., and Vigil, D.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 5.3.1 Developers Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2010-2185, December 2009; updated May 2013.

- Dakota 5.3 (January 2013) Manuals

  - User's: Adams, B.M., Bauman, L.E., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Swiler, L.P., and Vigil, D.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 5.3 User’s Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2010-2183, December 2009; updated January 2013.
  - Reference: Adams, B.M., Bauman, L.E., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Swiler, L.P., and Vigil, D.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 5.3 Reference Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2010-2184, December 2009; updated January 2013.
  - Theory: Adams, B.M., Bauman, L.E., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Swiler, L.P., and Vigil, D.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 5.3 Theory Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2011-9106, December 2009; updated January 2013.
  - Developer: Adams, B.M., Bauman, L.E., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Ebeida, M.S., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Hough, P.D., Hu, K.T., Jakeman, J.D., Swiler, L.P., and Vigil, D.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 5.3 Developers Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2010-2185, December 2009; updated January 2013.

- Eldred, M.S. and Wildey, T.M., "Propagation of Model Form Uncertainty for Thermal Hydraulics using RANS Turbulence Models in Drekar," Sandia Technical Report 2012-5845, July 2012.
- Dakota 5.2 (November 2011) Manuals

  - User's: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Hough, P.D., Lefantzi, S., Swiler, L.P., and Vigil, D.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 5.2 User’s Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2010-2183, December 2009; updated November 2011.
  - Reference: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Hough, P.D., Lefantzi, S., Swiler, L.P., and Vigil, D.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 5.2 Reference Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2010-2184, December 2009; updated November 2011.
  - Theory: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Hough, P.D., Lefantzi, S., Swiler, L.P., and Vigil, D.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 5.2 Theory Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2011-9106, December 2009; updated November 2011.
  - Developer: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Hough, P.D., Lefantzi, S., Swiler, L.P., and Vigil, D.M., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 5.2 Developers Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2010-2185, December 2009; updated November 2011.

- Eldred, M.S., "Investigation of Advanced UQ for CRUD Prediction with VIPRE," Sandia Technical Report SAND2011-7193, September 2011.
- Adams, B.M., Witkowski, W.R., and Sung, Y., "CASL L2 Milestone Report: VUQ.Y1.03, 'Enable Statistical Sensitivity and UQ Demonstrations for VERA'," Sandia Technical Report SAND2011-2238, April 2011.
- Dakota 5.1 (December 2010) Manuals

  - User's: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Gay, D.M., Haskell, K., Hough, P.D., Lefantzi, S., and Swiler, L.P., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 5.1 User’s Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2010-2183, December 2009; updated December 2010.
  - Reference: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Gay, D.M., Haskell, K., Hough, P.D., Lefantzi, S., and Swiler, L.P., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 5.1 Reference Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2010-2184, December 2009; updated December 2010.
  - Developer: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Gay, D.M., Haskell, K., Hough, P.D., Lefantzi, S., and Swiler, L.P., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 5.1 Developers Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2010-2185, December 2009; updated December 2010.

- Dakota 5.0 (December 2009) Manuals

  - User's: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Gay, D.M., Haskell, K., Hough, P.D., and Swiler, L.P., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 5.1 User’s Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2010-2183, December 2009.
  - Reference: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Gay, D.M., Haskell, K., Hough, P.D., and Swiler, L.P., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 5.1 Reference Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2010-2184, December 2009.
  - Developer: Adams, B.M., Bohnhoff, W.J., Dalbey, K.R., Eddy, J.P., Eldred, M.S., Gay, D.M., Haskell, K., Hough, P.D., and Swiler, L.P., "Dakota, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 5.1 Developers Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2010-2185, December 2009.

- Eldred, M.S. and Swiler, L.P., "Efficient Algorithms for Mixed Aleatory-Epistemic Uncertainty Quantification with Application to Radiation-Hardened Electronics; Part I: Algorithms and Benchmark Results, Sandia Technical Report SAND2009-5805, September 2009.
- Swiler, L.P., Castro, J.P., Paskaleva, B.S., Hembree, C.E., and Eldred, M.S., "Efficient Algorithms for Mixed Aleatory-Epistemic Uncertainty Quantification with Application to Radiation-Hardened Electronics; Part II: QASPR Examples," Sandia Technical Report SAND2009-5803, September 2009.
- Adams, B.M., Bichon, B.J., Carnes, B., Copps, K.D., Eldred, M.S., Hopkins, M.H., Neckels, D.C., Notz, P.K., Subia, S.R., and Wittwer, J.W., "Solution-Verified Reliability Analysis and Design of Bistable MEMS Using Error Estimation and Adaptivity, Sandia Technical Report SAND2006-6286, October 2006.
- Eldred, M.S., Brown, S.L., Adams, B.M., Dunlavy, D.M., Gay, D.M., Swiler, L.P., Giunta, A.A., Hart, W.E., Watson, J.-P., Eddy, J.P., Griffin, J.D., Hough, P.D., Kolda, T.G., Martinez-Canales, M.L. and Williams, P.J., "DAKOTA, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 4.0 Users Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2006-6337, October 2006. Updated September 2007 (Version 4.1) and November 2008 (Version 4.2).
- Eldred, M.S., Brown, S.L., Adams, B.M., Dunlavy, D.M., Gay, D.M., Swiler, L.P., Giunta, A.A., Hart, W.E., Watson, J.-P., Eddy, J.P., Griffin, J.D., Hough, P.D., Kolda, T.G., Martinez-Canales, M.L. and Williams, P.J., "DAKOTA, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 4.0 Reference Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2006-4055, October 2006. Updated September 2007 (Version 4.1) and November 2008 (Version 4.2).
- Eldred, M.S., Brown, S.L., Adams, B.M., Dunlavy, D.M., Gay, D.M., Swiler, L.P., Giunta, A.A., Hart, W.E., Watson, J.-P., Eddy, J.P., Griffin, J.D., Hough, P.D., Kolda, T.G., Martinez-Canales, M.L. and Williams, P.J., "DAKOTA, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis: Version 4.0 Developers Manual," Sandia Technical Report SAND2006-4056, October 2006. Updated September 2007 (Version 4.1) and November 2008 (Version 4.2).
- Sallaberry, C.J., Helton, J.C., and Hora, S.C., "Extension of Latin Hypercube Samples with Correlated Variables. Sandia Technical Report SAND2006-6315.
- Swiler, L.P. and Wyss, G.D., "A User's Guide to Sandia's Latin Hypercube Sampling Software: LHS UNIX Library Standalone Version, Sandia Technical Report SAND2004-2439, July 2004.
- Eldred, M.S., Giunta, A.A., van Bloemen Waanders, B.G., Wojtkiewicz, S.F., Jr., Hart, W.E., and Alleva, M.P., "DAKOTA, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis. Version 3.0 Users Manual." Sandia Technical Report SAND2001-3796, April 2002. Updated April 2003 (Version 3.1).
- Eldred, M.S., Giunta, A.A., van Bloemen Waanders, B.G., Wojtkiewicz, S.F., Jr., Hart, W.E., and Alleva, M.P., "DAKOTA, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis. Version 3.0 Reference Manual." Sandia Technical Report SAND2001-3515, April 2002. Updated April 2003 (Version 3.1), July 2004 (Version 3.2), and December 2004 (Version 3.3).
- Eldred, M.S., Giunta, A.A., van Bloemen Waanders, B.G., Wojtkiewicz, S.F., Jr., Hart, W.E., and Alleva, M.P., "DAKOTA, A Multilevel Parallel Object-Oriented Framework for Design Optimization, Parameter Estimation, Uncertainty Quantification, and Sensitivity Analysis. Version 3.0 Developers Manual." Sandia Technical Report SAND2001-3514, April 2002. Updated April 2003 (Version 3.1), July 2004 (Version 3.2), and December 2004 (Version 3.3).
- van Bloemen Waanders, B., Bartlett, R., Long, K., Boggs, P., and Salinger, A., "Large Scale Non-Linear Programming for PDE Constrained Optimization, Sandia Technical Report SAND2002-3198, October 2002.
- Gardner, D.R., and Vaughan, C.T., "The Optimization of a Shaped-Charge Design Using Parallel Computers," Sandia Technical Report SAND99-2953, November 1999.
- Hobbs, M.L., Erickson, K.L., and Chu, T.Y., "Modeling Decomposition of Unconfined Polyurethane Foam," Sandia Technical Report SAND99-2758, November 1999.
- Eisler, G.R., and Veers, P.S., "Parameter Optimization Applied to Use of Adaptive Blades on a Variable Speed Wind Turbine," Sandia Technical Report SAND98-2668, December 1998.
- McGee, B.C., Hobbs, M.L., and Baer, M.R., "Exponential 6 Parameterization for the JCZ3-EOS," Sandia Technical Report SAND98-1191, July 1998.
- Eldred, M.S.,"Optimization Strategies for Complex Engineering Applications," Sandia Technical Report SAND98-0340, February 1998.
- Zimmerman, D.C., "Genetic Algorithms for Navigating Expensive and Complex Design Spaces," Final Report for Sandia National Laboratories contract AO-7736 CA 02 (year 2), Sept. 1996.
- Hart, W.E., "Evolutionary Pattern Search Algorithms," Sandia Technical Report SAND95-2293, October 1995.
- Zimmerman, D.C., "Genetic Algorithms for Navigating Expensive and Complex Design Spaces," Final Report for Sandia National Laboratories contract AO-7736 (year 1), Sept. 1995.
- Meza, J.C., and Plantenga, T.D., "Optimal Control of a CVD Reactor for Prescribed Temperature Behavior," Sandia Technical Report SAND95-8224, April 1995.
- Moen, C.D., Spence, P.A., and Meza, J.C., "Optimal Heat Transfer Design of Chemical Vapor Deposition Reactors," Sandia Technical Report SAND95-8223, April 1995.
- Meza, J.C., "OPT++: An Object-Oriented Class Library for Nonlinear Optimization," Sandia Technical Report SAND94-8225, March 1994.
