Blurb::
Perform a recursion of admissible model subsets for a given model ensemble

Description::
For the weighted MLMC
(:dakkw:`method-multilevel_sampling-weighted-search_model_graphs`),
MFMC (:dakkw:`method-multifidelity_sampling-search_model_graphs` and
:cite:p:`peherstorfer2016optimal`), ACV
(:dakkw:`method-approximate_control_variate` and
:cite:p:`GORODETSKY2020109257`) and generalized ACV
(:dakkw:`method-approximate_control_variate-search_model_graphs` and
:cite:p:`Bomarito2022`) methods, this option specifies an enumerative
search over all model subsets for a given model ensemble.

All model selection cases forward to the generalized ACV solver,
subject to certain selections and restrictions.  In the weighted MLMC
and MFMC cases, a hierarchical DAG is employed across the model
approximations, where each approximation node points to the next
approximation of higher fidelity, ending with the truth model at the
root node.  For these cases, model selection can be used with either a
fixed (``no_recursion``) or variable (``full_recursion``) model
ordering within the hierarchical DAG for a particular model subset.
In the ACV case, a fixed peer DAG is employed, where each active
approximation node points to the root node (reordering is irrelevant),
and model selection enumerates the model subset included in the peer
DAG.  For generalized ACV, model selection may be combined with
enumeration of admissible DAGs using different DAG recursion throttles.

The model subset (and DAG definition) with the best performance
(lowest estimator variance for a prescribed budget or lowest cost for
a prescribed accuracy) is selected for final post-processing.

Topics::

Examples::

Activating model selection for ACV and GenACV:

.. code-block::

    method,
    	model_pointer = 'ENSEMBLE'
        approximate_control_variate acv_mf
    	  pilot_samples = 50 seed = 8674132
    	  search_model_graphs
    	    no_recursion		      # ACV case
    #	    kl_recursion  		      # GenACV case 1 of 3
    #	    partial_recursion depth_limit = 2 # GenACV case 2 of 3
    #	    full_recursion    		      # GenACV case 3 of 3
    	    model_selection		      # this option
    	  max_function_evaluations = 500

Activating model selection for weighted MLMC:

.. code-block::

    method,
        model_pointer = 'ENSEMBLE'
        multilevel_sampling weighted
          pilot_samples = 50 seed = 8674132
	  search_model_graphs
    	    no_recursion	      # fixed ordering in hierarchical DAG
    #	    full_recursion    	      # recur over orderings in hierarchical DAG
    	    model_selection	      # this option
        max_function_evaluations = 500

Activating model selection for MFMC:

.. code-block::

    method,
        model_pointer = 'ENSEMBLE'
        multifidelity_sampling 
          pilot_samples = 50 seed = 8674132
   	  search_model_graphs
    	    no_recursion	      # fixed ordering in hierarchical DAG
    #	    full_recursion    	      # recur over orderings in hierarchical DAG
    	    model_selection	      # this option
        max_function_evaluations = 500

Theory::

Faq::

See_Also::
